Release blog post for Data Prepper 2.9.0. (#3228)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2024-08-28-Data-Prepper-2.9.0-is-ready-for-download.md

---
layout: post
title:  Data Prepper 2.9.0 is ready for download
authors:
- dvenable
date: 2024-08-28 13:30:00 -0600
categories:
  - releases
excerpt: Data Prepper 2.9.0 contains core improvements to help with expressions, routing, performance, and more.
meta_keywords: expressions, set operators, conditional routing, performance
meta_description: Data Prepper 2.9.0 contains core improvements to help with expressions, routing, performance, and more.
---

## Introduction

You can download Data Prepper 2.9.0 today.
This feature release includes a number of core improvements and improvements to many popular processors.

> ## Improvements to expressions

Author: I made this change.

> 

Author: I'm not sure what the best approach is here. The word "when" isn't quite a keyword, so I don't want to put backticks around it.

Data Prepper continues to improve support for expressions to allow you more control for routing and when conditions.

> In this release, Data Prepper adds support for set operations.

Author: In this case, sets are similar to mathematical sets. It is somewhat similar to saying "arithmetic operations" or "string operations." So I don't think we should make any changes to formatting here.

These operations allow you to write conditions that check that a value is in a set of possible values.
This can be especially useful for routing where you need to route data depending on the system that data comes from.

Additionally, Data Prepper now has a new `startsWith` function to determine if a string value starts with another string.

## Default route

Data Prepper has had sink routing since the 2.0 release.
With this capability, pipeline authors can use Data Prepper expressions to route events to different sinks to meet their requirements.
One challenge that pipeline authors had was how to handle events that did not match any existing routes.
A common solution that teams found to work-around this was to have a route that was the inverse of other routes.
But, this required that they copy the other conditions and invert it.
This was difficult to handle and even harder to maintain.

Now, Data Prepper supports a special route named `_default`.

> By applying this route to a sink, pipeline authors can ensure that events that do not match any other routes will go a default sink of their choosing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By applying this route to a sink, pipeline authors can ensure that events that do not match any other routes will be sent to a default sink of their choosing.
```

> For example, consider a simple situation where you want to route front-end and back-end events to different sinks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, consider a simple situation in which you want to route frontend and backend events to different sinks.
```

> You can define two sinks for these and define your routes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can define two sinks for these events and then define your routes.
```

> But, what if you receive events that do not match?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But what if you receive events that do not match?
```

> The sample pipeline below shows you how you could handle events that do not match either the front-end or back-end routes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following sample pipeline shows an approach to handling events that do not match either the frontend or backend routes:
```

```
routes:
  - frontend: '/service == "front-end"`
  - backend: '/service == "back-end"`
sink:
 - opensearch:
      routes:
         - front-end
 - opensearch:
      routes:
         - back-end
  - opensearch:
       routes:
          - _default
```

## Performance

The Data Prepper maintainers have been working toward improving the performance of Data Prepper.
This release includes a number of internal improvements that speed up processing for many processors.

> You don't have to do anything other than update your version to get these improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You don't need to do anything other than update your version to experience these improvements.
```

Data Prepper 2.9 also offers some new features that you can use to help reduce out-of-memory errors or circuit breaker trips.

> Many pipelines involve taking some source data in the form of a string and then extracting that data into a structure.

Reviewer: "Many pipelines involve extracting source data in the form of a string into a structure"?

Author: Please see my modified wording.

> Some examples of these are `grok` and `parse_json`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some examples are `grok` and `parse_json`.
```

> When you use these processors, you more than double the size of each event you are processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you use these processors, you more than double the size of each event that you process.
```

> As the events flowing through the system are the largest part of memory usage, this will greatly increase your memory requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the events flowing through the system are the largest part of memory usage, this will greatly increase your memory requirements.
```

> 

Reviewer: Line above: "are the largest part of memory usage" => "represent the largest portion of memory usage"?

Author: Please see my modified wording.

> Many pipeline authors will use these processors and then in a second processor remove the source data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many pipeline authors may use these processors and then remove the source data in a second processor.
```

Author: Please see my modified wording.

I thought the "may" in your suggestion didn't quite convey that people already do this.

> This is good, but it doesn't always make the available available for garbage collection when you need it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This may be a good approach, but it doesn't always make the available for garbage collection when you need it.
```

Author: Please see my modified wording.

> The reason is that Data Prepper pipelines operate on batches of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason for this is that Data Prepper pipelines operate on batches of data.
```

> As these batches of data move through the pipeline, the pipeline will expand the memory usage in one processor and then attempt to reduce it in the next.

Reviewer: Line 75: There is a word missing between "the" and "available".

Author: I changed to: "the memory used by the string available"

> Because these happen in batches, Data Prepper may expand many thousands of events, before starting to remove the source data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because these happen in batches, Data Prepper may expand many thousands of events before starting to remove the source data.
```

> 

Reviewer: Line above: "these happen" => Either "this happens" or name the noun represented by "these".

Author: "Because the memory expansion happens"

> See the following example pipeline which runs `grok` and then `delete_entries`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the following example pipeline, which runs `grok` and then `delete_entries`.
```

> With the configured `batch_size` of 100,000, Data Prepper will expand 100,000 events before deleting the messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With a configured `batch_size` of 100,000, Data Prepper will expand 100,000 events before deleting the messages.
```

```
my-pipeline:
  buffer:
    bounded_blocking:
      batch_size: 100000
  processor:
    - grok:
        match:
          message: ["..."]
    - delete_entries:
        with_keys: ["message"]
```

To help with this memory usage issue, Data Prepper now provides a `delete_source` flag on some of these processors, including `grok` and `parse_json`.

> Going back to the example above, you could both simplify the pipeline and reduce the amount of memory used in between processors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Returning to the preceding example, you could both simplify the pipeline and reduce the amount of memory used in between processors:
```

```
my-pipeline:
  buffer:
    bounded_blocking:
      batch_size: 100000
  processor:
    - grok:
        match:
          message: ["..."]
        delete_source: true
```

> When you see this pattern of deleting the source in a separate processor, migrate your pipeline to start using `delete_source` instead to improve your overall memory usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you observe this pattern of the source being deleted in a separate processor, migrate your pipeline to start using `delete_source` in order to improve your overall memory usage.
```

> 

Reviewer: Line above: "migrate your pipeline to start using" => "configure your pipeline to use"?

Author: This looks good. I took it.

## Getting started

* To download Data Prepper, visit the [OpenSearch downloads](https://opensearch.org/downloads.html) page.
* For instructions on how to get started with Data Prepper, see [Getting started with Data Prepper](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/data-prepper/getting-started/).

> * To learn more about the work in progress for Data Prepper 2.10 and other releases, take a look at the [Data Prepper roadmap](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/projects/1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To learn more about the work in progress for Data Prepper 2.10 and other releases, see the [Data Prepper roadmap](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/projects/1).
```

---
layout: post
title:  Data Prepper 2.9.0 is ready for download
authors:
- dvenable

> date: 2024-08-28 13:30:00 -0600

Reviewer 2: Please update this to today's date: 2024-08-29

categories:
  - releases
excerpt: Data Prepper 2.9.0 contains core improvements to expressions, routing, performance, and more.
meta_keywords: expressions, set operators, conditional routing, performance

> meta_description: Data Prepper 2.9.0 contains core improvements to help with expressions, routing, performance, and more.

Reviewer 2: Please update the blog meta with the following: 
_meta_keywords:_   Data Prepper, condition expressions, conditional processing, expression syntax, tartsWith function

_meta_description:_  Data Prepper 2.9.0 adds support for set operations and a new startsWith function, giving users more control over routing and conditional processing.

---

## Introduction

You can download Data Prepper 2.9.0 today.
This release includes a number of core improvements as well as improvements to many popular processors.

> ## Expressions improvements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Expression improvements
```

> Data Prepper continues to improve support for expressions to allow you more control conditions that you use for routing and conditional processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data Prepper continues to improve support for expressions to allow you more control over conditions that you use for routing and conditional processing.
```

The following sample pipeline shows an approach to handling events that do not match either the frontend or backend routes:

```
routes:
  - frontend: '/service == "front-end"`
  - backend: '/service == "back-end"`
sink:
 - opensearch:
      routes:
         - front-end
 - opensearch:
      routes:
         - back-end
  - opensearch:
       routes:
          - _default
```

## Performance

The Data Prepper maintainers have been working toward improving the performance of Data Prepper.
This release includes a number of internal improvements that speed up processing for many processors.
You don't need to do anything other than update your version to experience these improvements.

Data Prepper 2.9 also offers some new features that you can use to help reduce out-of-memory errors or circuit breaker trips.
Many pipelines involve extracting source data from a string into a structure.
Some examples are `grok` and `parse_json`.
When you use these processors, you more than double the size of each event that you process.
Because the events flowing through the system consume the largest portion of memory usage, this will greatly increase your memory requirements.

> Many pipeline authors may these processors and then remove the source data in a second processor.

Reviewer: There's now a word missing between "may" and "these".

        with_keys: ["message"]
```

To help with this memory usage issue, Data Prepper now provides a `delete_source` flag on some of these processors, including `grok` and `parse_json`.

Returning to the preceding example, you could both simplify the pipeline and reduce the amount of memory used in between processors:

```
my-pipeline:
  buffer:
    bounded_blocking:
      batch_size: 100000
  processor:
    - grok:
        match:
          message: ["..."]
        delete_source: true
```

If you observe this pattern of the source being deleted in a separate processor, configure your pipeline to use `delete_source` in order to improve your overall memory usage.

## Getting started

* To download Data Prepper, visit the [OpenSearch downloads](https://opensearch.org/downloads.html) page.
* For instructions on how to get started with Data Prepper, see [Getting started with Data Prepper](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/data-prepper/getting-started/).
* To learn more about the work in progress for Data Prepper 2.10 and other releases, see the [Data Prepper roadmap](https://github.com/opensearch-project/data-prepper/projects/1).

## Thanks to our contributors!

> The following people contributed to this release. Thank you!

Reviewer: "people" => "community members"?

> * [chenqi0805](https://github.com/chenqi0805) - Qi Chen

Reviewer: List: The hyphens should all be en dashes (-- in Markdown) or colons.

* [danhli](https://github.com/danhli) - Daniel Li
* [dinujoh](https://github.com/dinujoh) - Dinu John
* [dlvenable](https://github.com/dlvenable) - David Venable
* [graytaylor0](https://github.com/graytaylor0) - Taylor Gray
* [ivan-tse](https://github.com/ivan-tse) - Ivan Tse
* [jayeshjeh](https://github.com/jayeshjeh) - Jayesh Parmar
* [joelmarty](https://github.com/joelmarty) - Joël Marty
* [kkondaka](https://github.com/kkondaka) - Krishna Kondaka

> * [mishavay-aws](https://github.com/mishavay-aws) - None

Reviewer: I probably wouldn't include "None" here and in the last line.

Author: This is the output from the GitHub API, but I'll change it.
